check out the horses store at
www. horses.
land F Scott Fitzgerald's novel The
Great gadsby is an evisceration of the
American Spirit in ways both subtle and
blatant Fitzgerald ridiculed the
American dream positioning a knife at
its very heart for the author American
society had decayed into chaotic
materialism and the country had taken
this American Dream with it the events
of the story are remarkable seething
with Fitzgerald's distaste at the
country around him every character in
The Great Gatsby is truly deplorable and
the worst of them Escape entirely
unscathed in authoring this brief 200
Page Nolla Fitzgerald reflected on the
America of his age and predicted the
America to come the book is rif with
false prophets but it is Fitzgerald
himself who emerges as the true psychic
by cont templating The Great Gatsby and
its context we can discover
uncomfortable truths about the past and
present of America and the American
[Music]
dream of course before we see how
Fitzgerald dismantled it we would do
well to identify the American dream
itself this term the American dream was
not actually coined until the early
1930s about 7 years after Fitzgerald
wrote The Great Gatsby
but the myth The Narrative had existed
for centuries without such a tidy name
the American dream is said to be the
greatest dream for the individual it
tells us that even those born at the
bottom may rise up to the Pinnacle of
society they can own a house impact the
nation and move mountains this is
usually achieved through some
combination of tenacity Talent optimism
grit for Fitzgerald this had all decayed
into a propaganda it was a former truth
long distorted by the realities of
American society to come to his
conclusion Fitzgerald simply examined
the world around him now Fitzgerald was
not a philosopher or a social critic he
was a writer of fiction so rarely has he
expressed this disdain in a pointed
non-fictional way but if we examine the
cultural climate of his time and The
Works Fitzgerald studied we can see how
the author reached his rather
pessimistic conclusion Fitzgerald wrote
The Great Gatsby in the early early
1920s at a time of economic revolution
in America after the first world war the
US economy fell into a depression
unemployment Rose to nearly 12% in 1921
the price of crops surged to problematic
unattainable Highs but these economic
woses swiftly turned around unemployment
dropped to 2.4% by 1923 the nation's GDP
increased by 40% annual income per
capita surged by 30% the SC scholar
Robert a Divine has said the American
people by the 1920s enjoyed the highest
standard of living of Any Nation on
Earth in the early 20s the American
economy grew by 7% per year with the
country responsible for 50% of the
world's industrial output amidst Times
Like These the American dream was as
alive as ever but Fitzgerald and his
contemporaries perceived danger the
author Oswald Spangler published a book
called The Decline of the West in two
volumes from 1918 to
1922 read today the book is massive
confounding and provocative to the point
of being
self-indulgent it is at best a bore and
at worst vaguely racist but it was a
product of its time and indeed it became
one of the most influential works in the
era Fitzgerald once wrote in a letter I
read Spangler the same summer I was
writing The Great Gatsby and I don't
think I ever quite recovered from him we
cannot say with certainty which portions
of the book resonated so intensely with
Fitzgerald but the overall Narrative of
Western decomposition sits at the heart
of The Great Gatsby Spangler wrote as
soon as the market has become the town
it is no longer a question of mere
centers for streams of goods traversing
a purely peasant landscape but of a
second world within the walls the true
Urban man is not a producer he has not
the inward linkage with soil or with the
goods that pass through his hands he
does not live with these but looks at
them from outside and appraises them in
relation to his own life upkeep in place
of thinking in Goods we have thinking in
money this idea of thinking in money is
crucial to The Great Gatsby but it is
like the clothing the book wears at the
sole of Fitzgerald's novel we have a
more profound disillusionment with the
American dream with that in mind it is
time to begin our investigation in
earnest
narrated by a man named Nick Caraway The
Great Gatsby follows its titular
character James Gatsby born impoverished
Gatsby pursues a romantic idealized life
which is represented by his ostensible
love for a wealthy young woman named
Daisy essentially Gatsby tries to become
the old money sort that Daisy desires
Gatsby earns a fortune as a bootlegger
reacquaints himself with the now married
Daisy and tries to earn her favor as a
very new man this could be romance is
the driving point of narrative action in
the great catsby but we must understand
Gatsby himself if we are to discover the
true meaning of this romantic
entanglement Jay Gatsby was born as
James gats in North Dakota it would be
very blunt to say that Gatsby yearned to
be rich more accurately and more
sincerely he yearned to be what he was
not according to the narrator Nick his
parents were shiftless and unsuccessful
Farm people his imagination had never
really accepted them as his parents at
all it is precisely this imagination
which typifies and motivates Gatsby this
rejection of his past this too can be
said of the American dreamer as
suggested by William Kan in his paper
American dreaming really reading The
Great Gatsby C Notes The Greatest
American dreamers say yes but their
power comes first from saying no the
American dreamer is propelled by the
dreamer's disavow of his or her past the
refusal to be that person I cannot
accept these parents this upbringing who
I am is intolerable to me and I will not
endure my existence in this poultry life
I will become someone
else indeed this is Gatsby's goal
already we can begin to see that Daisy
is not exactly the love of his life his
romantic interest in Daisy is just one
facet of Gatsby's larger goal she is his
trophy for his lifelong Quest
Fitzgerald's first blow at the American
dream comes when Gatsby's career is
revealed he is a bootlegger who sells
alcohol illegally in pharmacies across
the country here Fitzgerald rejects the
traditional social Mobility which the
American dream claims Gatsby is shown to
be an intelligent capable man but even
he resorted not to schooling and career
building instead taking up a life of
illegitimate gains and criminality
through this methodology Gatsby does
indeed amass a great Fortune it is a
fortune which he displays ostentatiously
for a number of reasons in fact his
wealth often takes the place of Gatsby
himself before we even meet him the
titular character is defined by the
opulence of his home the narrator Nick
describes it the house was a colossal
Affair by any standard it was a factual
imitation of some Hotel Deville in
Normandy with a tower on one side
spanking new under a thin beard of raw
ivy and a marble swimming pool in more
than 40 acres of lawn and garden Gatsby
is further defined by the rockus parties
which he throws each weekend which are
so blanketed and expense that they may
as well be celebrations of money itself
although glamorous Fitzgerald unmasks
these parties and again in sizes the
American dream to execute his events
Gatsby employs a small army of butlers
Maids cooks and servants every Friday
five crates of oranges and lemons
arrived from a frorer in New York every
Monday these same oranges and lemons
left his back door in a pyramid of
pulpless halves there was a machine in
the kitchen which could extract the
juice of 200 oranges in half an hour if
a little button was pressed 200 times by
a Butler's thumb the lower class the
Butlers like this one then are little
more than tools for Gatsby's glamorous
lifestyle Gatsby who we take as the
embodiment of the American dream is
built on the backs of the poor his life
requires exploitation like his machine
extracts the juice from oranges only to
discard the quote pulpless halves
Fitzgerald's American Dream squeezes the
lay person to extract the juice of
capital for those invited to the
party Gatsby's absence continues through
much of the book so instead of meeting
Gatsby we are first introduced to his
world his parties his house his cars
Nick caroway offers us this there was
music from my neighbor's house through
through these summer nights in his blue
Gardens men and girls came and went like
moths among the whisperings and the
champagne and the stars at high tide in
the afternoon I watched his guests
diving from the Tower of his raft or
taking the sun on the hot sand of his
Beach while his two motorboats slit the
Waters of the sound drawing aquaplanes
over cataracts of foam on weekends his
Rolls-Royce became an Omnibus bearing
parties to and from the city between 900
in the morning and long past midnight
while his station wagon scampered like a
Brisk yellow bug to meet all trains and
on Mondays eight servants including an
extra Gardener toiled all day with mops
and scrubbing brushes and Hammers and
garden shears repairing the ravages of
the night before these are the results
of the American dream as Fitzgerald sees
it the sum of Fitzgerald's American
dream is not in personal happiness but
in material abundance these material
things literally take the place of the
man Gatsby himself so to fit Gerald the
American dream and its results become
something of an illusion Gatsby is and
always has been happy to live in an
illusion the people who attend his
parties do not know who he is the
aftermath of the parties is quickly
disposed of each morning Gatsby even
proclaims that Daisy is a Catholic and
that is why she cannot divorce Tom but
Nick tells us outright that this isn't
true Daisy was not a Catholic and I was
a little shocked at the elaborateness of
the LIE Gatsby even lived himself as an
illusion his wab isms pink suits and old
sport verbage bordered on the Absurd to
those like Nick Buchanan Gatsby does not
recognize the elusory nature of his life
he has convinced himself that the
entirety of his life's efforts have been
for Daisy indeed it is his relationship
with Daisy where we see Fitzgerald's
impressions of the American dream and
its Pursuit displayed most
viciously when we are shown Gatsby and D
's very first introduction prior to the
events of the book itself we can
immediately see the true reasons for
Gatsby's attraction Gatsby was a soldier
when he met Daisy far removed from the
debonaire life he would go on to attain
he was stationed near her home and the
young Gatsby went with a group of fellow
soldiers to visit the residents Nick
tells us he went to her house at first
with other officers from Camp Taylor
then alone it amazed him he had never
been in such a beautiful house before
but what gave it an air of breathless
intensity was that Daisy lived there it
was as casual a thing to her as his tent
out at Camp was to him Gatsby's takeaway
from his first meeting with Daisy was
not actually Daisy herself instead it
was her home the house had a breathless
intensity the house was beautiful not
Daisy on that same page the pros goes on
to wax further about the home again the
word beautiful only appears to describe
the house not Daisy herself we are told
too that Daisy has been loved by many
men prior to Gatsby's first meeting this
only encouraged Gatsby it excited him
too that many men had already loved
Daisy it increased her value in his eyes
with the distinct choice of words
increased her value we see Daisy
referred to in Market terms she is
classified more as an asset than a
person which is emblematic of Gatsby's
material Obsession here we also have a
remarkable parallel with the American
dream it is one exalted by many even
proven by many famous individuals others
have fulfilled it so the masses are
encouraged by these stories of success
so too with Daisy the fact that other
men had loved her only encouraged
Gatsby's belief in his
Pursuit Gatsby did ignite a romance upon
first meeting Daisy but the way it is
communicated to the reader is remarkably
unromantic Fitzgerald writes he took
what he could get ravenously and
unscrupulously eventually he took Daisy
one still October night took her because
he had no real right to touch her hand
in his army uniform Gatsby wore a
disguise he was unburdened by the cheap
clothing which he would have otherwise
worn he could spin lies to Daisy about
his past and his future which he
precisely did when we see Daisy and
Gatsby's relationship as a metaphor for
the American dream This truly becomes a
vicious attack on that dream from
Fitzgerald those who pursue the American
dream do so ravenously and
unscrupulously they steal lie and
deceive because this is the only way for
Fitzgerald to make the American dream
into reality Gatsby has perhaps
convinced himself to the contrary that
he has an Earnest love for Daisy but we
can see very clearly that Gatsby's love
was not for Daisy it was for Daisy's
world for what she represented so his
love was false was always false in the
same way Fitzgerald believes the
American dream is also false at the end
of their test Nick tells us Daisy quote
vanished into her rich house into her
rich full life leaving Gatsby
nothing she left him no thing rather
than nobody and indeed for Gatsby Daisy
was just that a thing an idea not a
person and so like Americans pursued
their dream with every bit of Faculty
which existed in their lives Gatsby does
the same at Daisy he spends years
creating himself as the ideal match for
her as someone worthy of accomplishing
her when he finally reaches this
Pinnacle when this height of the
American dream is so occupied by money
and material things Fitzgerald begins to
show us the illusion of it all when
Gatsby meets Daisy at the time of the
story we are once again shown the true
nature of his infatuation fit Gerald
writes it was Gatsby who was breathless
who was somehow betrayed her porch was
bright with the bought luxury of
Starshine the Wicker of the saete
squeaked fashionably as she turned
towards him and he kissed her curious
and lovely mouth she had caught a cold
and it made her voice huskier and more
Charming than ever and Gatsby was
overwhelmingly aware of the youth and
mystery that wealth imprisons and
preserves of the freshness of many
clothes and of Daisy gleaming like
silver safe and proud above the hot
struggles of the poor here Gatsby again
recognizes not the beauty of daisy as a
person but as a symbol she gleamed like
silver safe and proud above the
struggles of the poor struggles Gatsby
knew intimately well she is more
territory than person a Promised Land he
can access if only he can win Daisy's
affection earlier we discussed Gatsby's
desire as the American dreamer to erase
his past to say no to his own background
he too imposes that on Daisy even after
Daisy admits to loving Gatsby that isn't
enough Gatsby tells her to tell Tom that
she doesn't love him this has been his
lifelong Vision it never occurs to
Gatsby to consider whether Daisy herself
wants to participate in his dream he
assumes that she does and that she will
immediately erase the fact that she has
been and is married to Tom and is the
mother of Tom's child indeed here is
Fitzgerald's indictment on the American
dream once again
according to our myth the dreamer need
not consider if the Society of America
wants to oblige his Ambitions the
dreamer need only act and he will
achieve his ends we are told but
Fitzgerald believes this to be false he
perceives that it is in large part up to
the society if one is permitted to
achieve their American Dream for her
part Daisy ultimately does not allow
Gatsby in the naive nature of the
American dream is relayed once again in
this exch change between Nick and gadsby
I wouldn't ask too much of her I
ventured you can't repeat the past can't
repeat the past he cried
incredulously why of course you can he
looked around him wildly as if the past
were lurking here in the shadow of his
house just Out Of Reach of his hand I'm
going to fix everything just the way it
was before he said nodding determinately
she'll see here we have Gatsby almost
panicking in denial when he meet meets
with the idea that his American dream
may be out of reach the very ethos of
Gatsby cracks he cries that he can
repeat the past though Gatsby's defining
trait hither to has been his outright
rejection of his own past at this point
it is starting to become clear to Gatsby
that there is some piece of the puzzle
which he does not have which he may
never have he has bought into the
American dream and is now discovering it
may have been a propaganda Fitzgerald
notes Gatsby is looking around searching
for something in the shadows of his own
house the author then doubles down on
this idea just lines later he talked a
lot about the past and I gathered he
wanted to recover something some idea of
himself perhaps that had gone into
loving Daisy his life has been confused
and disordered since then but if he
could once return to a certain starting
place and go over it all slowly could
find out what that thing
was that thing which was lurking in the
shadows of his house which he seeks to
recover is true truth the truth about
his American dream that it is in fact a
lie all through the book The Closer
Gatsby gets to Daisy the more unraveled
his American Dream becomes when he moves
into his Mansion across from Daisy and
Tom's we are told about a Mist hovering
over the bay which blocks Gatsby's view
of the Buchanan home he is right on the
precipice but suddenly unable to see his
dream Gatsby famously spends evenings
staring at a green light which is
perched on the end of Tom and Daisy's
dock this light is often at the center
of Gatsby analysis and for good reason
it is the entire book boiled down into
one piece of Machinery green is the
color of life itself it is too the color
of money greed jealousy and Wall Street
the light is the American dream Gatsby
and Fitzgerald's all at once so we are
presented with this damning passage
Daisy put her arm through his abruptly
but he seemed absorbed in what he had
just said possibly it had occurred to
him that the Colossal significance of
that light had now vanished forever
compared to the great distance that had
separated him from Daisy it had seemed
very near to her almost touching her it
had seemed as close as a star to the
moon now it was again a green light on a
dock his count of Enchanted objects had
diminished by
one again the closer gats becomes to
Daisy the more fraudulent everything is
revealed to be this is brought to its
ultimate not by Gatsby's own faculties
but by another character Daisy's husband
Tom Buchanan the destruction of Gatsby
and his illusion occurs at Tom's hands
the main character spend an afternoon in
The Plaza Hotel in New York City Tom
calls Gatsby out on the entirety of his
artifice his false past his bootlegging
operation his standing as an eternal
Outsider saying that Gatsby should only
see Daisy if he's bringing groceries to
her door Gatsby implores Daisy to tell
Tom she never loved him and she does so
in the most non-committal way she is
trembling and immediately regretful
Daisy quickly backtracks and declares
that she loved both men in this scene
Tom commits many murders he murders
Gatsby's American Dream Gatsby's romance
with Daisy and the entirety of Gatsby's
life's Ambitions Gatsby cannot be truly
in Elite Society he cannot be with Daisy
despite all of his money he will never
gain access to his dream the titular
character realizes he will never be he
will always be
almost that missing piece which he
searched for in his home it is revealed
to him by Tom it is all of the truths
and all of the
lies Tom also commits murder in the more
real sense of the word in short Tom
frames Gatsby for the death of his
mistress Myrtle her widowed husband
shoots Gatsby in his swimming pool and
Gatsby dies the swimming pool is
entirely emblematic of Fitzgerald's
false American dream it is opulent and
beautiful and useless the book tells us
Gatsby never once swam in the pool so
when he finally does when he literally
dives into his illusion becomes his
grave Jay Gatsby is just one cast member
in Fitzgerald's American Nightmare so to
fully understand the book we must
investigate its other actors
among interpretations and Analysis of
The Great Gatsby it is popular to
chastise Daisy Buchanan as a
particularly venomous character the
following phrases have all been used to
describe Daisy vicious emptiness
monstrous moral indifference criminally
amoral vulgar and inhuman dark destroyer
a purveyor of corruption and death and
one even more verbose an early critic
called Daisy the quote First notable
anti- Virgin of our fiction the
Prototype of the Blasphemous portraits
of the fair goddess as in which
our 20th century fiction abounds clearly
Daisy is not looked upon favorably nor
should she be none of the characters in
The Great Gatsby can really be described
as good people but Fitzgerald was a
masterful author and so his characters
should not be uced to Clumsy
categorizations of bad or good Daisy
very much included for critics Daisy
Buchanan was a punching bag and for the
characters in The Great Gatspy she
serves much the same purpose one of
Daisy's first lines in the Nolla is a
sort of confession she meets Nick and
proclaims I'm paralyzed with happiness
Daisy is too a victim of the American
dream her paralysis is the chief SYM
symptom Daisy's paralysis is large by
marrying Tom her life has become Frozen
by money and Status she comes from money
and married into money her whole life
has been dictated by convention and
Circumstance Daisy is the embodiment of
the vulgar materialism which Fitzgerald
saw in the American dream she was an
Insider desperately and ruthlessly clean
to her status and her riches Fitzgerald
did not seek empathy for the daisies of
the world these ruling class sour
and so Daisy is not portrayed as a
particularly likable woman she is lazy
flighty and unconcerned with anything
outside of her immediate strata but this
was not really the fault of Daisy rather
it was the impact of American
materialism a sort of brainwashing see
Daisy is something of a two-sided card
on one side she is presented as shallow
and vaguely self-obsessed but this is
how her world instructed her to be and
Daisy is well aware of this so on the
reverse side we have have an intelligent
perhaps even cunning woman who is just
as attached to her status as Gatsby
himself also is when describing her
infant daughter Daisy says I hope she'll
be a fool that's the best thing a girl
can be in this world a beautiful little
fool this line alone speaks volumes for
her character she is well aware of her
Insider status and how one achieves it
as a woman so with this in mind while
she does love Gatsby in her own perhaps
shallow way da Daisy ultimately
prioritizes her status over this love
Daisy flirts with the idea of running
away with Gatsby certainly we are told
of an incident that occurred before the
events of the book when Daisy received a
letter from Gatsby on the eve of her
wedding she ripped a
$350,000 pearl necklace from her neck
leaving the pearls to scatter onto the
ground this necklace was a gift she'd
received from Tom Daisy called The
Wedding off but was immediately forced
by her friends and staff into an ice
cold bath as she was forced into the
bath Daisy was still clutching Gatsby's
letter the water destroyed the letter
and the wedding went on as planned this
bath too can be seen as Fitzgerald's
American dream it is a cold shock
ultimately bringing the illusions of
materialism into a paralyzing Truth for
all parties
involved Nick tells us all the time
Gatsby was overseas something within her
was crying for a decision she wanted her
life shaped now immediately and the
decision must be made by some force of
Love of Money of unquestionable
practicality that was close at
hand and so she married Tom Buchanan who
was unfaithful abusive and brutish Daisy
is not purely a victim though she is
just as deplorable as her peers and
Fitzgerald makes that quite clear
throughout the story after all for
whatever self-awareness she displays on
the dangers of her life lifestyle she
elects repeatedly to remain in her
castle she shows no interest in the
needs or wants of others with the
possible exception of Gatsby but upon
inspection even her feelings towards
Gatsby seem fraudulent indeed the two
have that distinctly in
common Daisy is basically Gatsby Jay
Gatsby has constructed and lives in a
fantasy land Daisy herself expresses
this same desire she tells Gatsby I'd
like to just get one of those pink
clouds and put you in it and push you
around she has a romantic vision of her
life with Gatsby an escape from the
insistences of material Society a
dreamlike land where reality need not
exist she seeks the past she desires to
relive the early stages of her romance
with Gatsby prior to her marriage and
prior to her insertion into the world of
Tom
Buchanan Gatsby sees cracks in his
vision for Daisy likewise but more
severely Daisy finds Gatsby unable to
meet her expectations Gatsby demands
that she tells Tom she does not love him
he demands Daisy fit perfectly into his
vision for life which in turn does not
fit into her vision this is made
abundant as Gatsby ostentatiously shows
off his collection of fine shirts when
Gatsby shows the shirts to Daisy they
are piled neatly in his closet but he
begins to throw them onto the floor in a
messy pile Daisy's reaction is to weep
with the the ideal of her and Gatsby her
Dreamland also comes apart like the neat
piles of shirts she realizes that
Gatsby's world is an illusion as is her
vision for their romance and so her
desire can never be fulfilled when Tom
reveals Gatsby's true nature to Daisy in
the hotel she finally withdraws from
Gatsby entirely Fitzgerald writes with
every word she was drawing further and
further into herself so he gave that up
and Only The Dead dream fought on as the
afternoon Slipped Away trying to touch
what was no longer tangible struggling
unhappily UND despairingly toward that
lost voice across the room Daisy's
fantasy is truly dead Gatsby could not
live up to her vision for
him within Gatsby and Daisy we have a
mutual disillusionment but the results
of each are wildly Divergent Fitzgerald
realizes that Daisy being of the
privileged Elite has a safety net she
can return to her life with Tom driving
Gatsby's car with him in the passenger
seat Daisy hits and kills Tom's mistress
there's nothing to indicate that this
was intentional but it allows Daisy to
slip back into her previous life with
Tom Buchanan
uninterrupted she is damningly happy to
let Gatsby carry the blame legal or
otherwise for the incident tellingly
Daisy and Gatsby both have their hands
on the wheel when they killed the woman
indeed they both steered their own
fantasies into
death with no great stretch of the
imagination we can read The Great Gatsby
as a letter of hatred to the elites of
American society and all they represent
in such a case it would be Tom
Buchanan's name on the envelope in a
swarm of bad Tom Buchanan is perhaps the
worst Tom is brutish he is a well-built
man who in appearance and in beliefs
becomes a sort of Proto fascist he spews
racist vitriol detests the lower class
and is perfectly happy to leave
destruction in his wake Tom's physical
description is relevant to this theme of
The American Dream he is described as
having a cruel body which is capable of
enormous leverage at one point he hits
his impoverished mistress Myrtle and
breaks her nose Tom bucanan is not only
Tom he is the generations of wealthy
American families who conquered the
lower classes who are capable of a
strange and leisurely sort of Oppression
like Tom these people would rather spend
afternoons drinking and playing Polo but
with the slightest whim the toms of the
world can uproot and destroy those who
are beneath them indeed Tom does just
this it only takes a brief monologue for
him to undo the lifelong work of Jay
gadsby Tom and Daisy have many of their
worst qualities in common while their
relationship cannot be categorized as
happy or even entirely functional the
pair are intimately similar near the end
of the book Nick concludes they were
careless people Tom and Daisy they
smashed up things and creatures and then
retreated back into their money or their
vast carelessness or whatever it was
that kept them together and let other
people clean up the mess they had made
indeed this sort of well financed
carelessness is a tie which bonds Daisy
and Tom together it is a unique trait
which Fitzgerald notes exists
preeminently in those who hold status
like the Buchanan Tom Buchanan is
enormously wealthy despite having no
career and contributing nothing to
society Tom further has no ambition
other than to keep Invaders like Gatsby
out of his castle Daisy likewise she is
never portrayed as having any particular
motivation besides self-interest she is
not as Direct in her oppression as Tom
but she has a guilt by complacence her
romance with Gatsby results in the
deaths of two individuals nothing
indicates that either of these bodies
weigh on her conscience at all she does
not attend Gatsby's funeral this makes
for a very clear portrait of how
Fitzgerald sees old money Elites at the
end of the story Tom and Daisy perform
one of the classically Imperial American
Feats after engineering chaos and
destruction they simply believe they
just move on Unbound by
consequence Tom's mistress Myrtle is a
supporting character in the story but in
Reading The Great Gatsby within the
context of the American dream she is
remarkably significant Myrtle not only
propels much of the action in the Nolla
she provides Grand insight into the
story's main characters like Gatsby
Myrtle has her own American Dream hers
is wealth and all of the lifestyle which
comes with it Myrtle is married to a man
named George who is a mechanic and owns
a gas station by her actions and words
it is clear that Myrtle despises her
husband he is a poor man who was forced
to borrow his suit for their wedding
remarking upon this Myrtle says the only
crazy I was when I married him I knew
right away I made a mistake he borrowed
somebody's suit to get married in and
never told me about it and the man came
after it one day when he was out we do
not learn much about George as a person
but it is almost irrelevant Myrtle
disdains George's status and so she
disdains him in her American Dream
Myrtle enters into an affair with Tom
Buchanan she believes that this is a way
to enter into the aristocratic Society
Myrtle is under the impression that Tom
will leave Daisy for her although there
is little to indicate this was ever
Tom's intention as typical for
Fitzgerald in the Nolla Myrtle's quest
for her American Dream decays and
eventually kills her Tom is m 's dream
he abuses her lies to her and
manipulates her in the end her
relationship with Tom brings about her
death she is killed by Daisy who is at
the wheel of Gatsby's car of course Tom
Buchanan simply continues with his
days Nick caroway is the narrator of the
Nolla much has been debated about his
reliability as a narrator but I believe
that Nick is and must be reasonably
reliable for the book to even function
Fitzgerald exchanged a series of letters
with his editor after finishing the
Great Gatsby in which they discussed
Nick carway as a narrator in these
letters Fitzgerald does not say anything
to indicate that Nick is unreliable
furthermore The Great Gatsby is about
the corruption and decline of the
American dream this is not a
Labyrinthian interpretation or abstract
idea it is the central theme of the book
as expressed by Fitzgerald himself it is
through Nick Caraway that Fitzgerald
communicates his notion of this dream
this notion is the whole point of the
book so for the Great Gatsby to even
function Nick must be reliable if Nick
is untrustworthy then the Nolla becomes
little more than a soap opera Nick is
not an unreliable narrator in the
traditional sense of the word but he is
also not a truly objective narrator
while it is tempting to categorize him
in either Camp Nick is what I would call
a biased narrator Nick has a background
which is relevant to the story and how
we receive the story he is a person of
means Nick graduated from Yale but he
does not have the same laziness inducing
status of the buchanans he fought in the
War Nick made the decision to travel
east to pursue the bond business though
he seems to have rather mixed feelings
about it he recounts having dinner at
the Yale Yacht Club but notes it was an
experience he did not enjoy Nick is
something of an outsider in the story at
least he is outside of the materialism
and the American dreaming which propels
virtually all of the other characters
Fitzgerald establishes this early in the
Nolla when Nick States I lived at West
Egg The Well less fashionable of the two
though this is a most superficial tag to
express the bizarre and not a little
Sinister contrast between them Nick is
put off by the division of East and West
Egg describing this attitude as bizarre
and Sinister throughout the story he is
in awe of the materialism around him he
remarks on the opulence of gadsby Daisy
and Tom Nick ultimately leaves the East
Coast describing the area as having a
quality of distortion and laments his
journey as him visiting the wrong house
the buchanans especially Tom are quick
to judge and excommunicate those of the
lower classes Nick is generally welcomed
around them throughout the whole story
but regards the group with an amount of
distaste it is clear that Nick has no
particular love for for the lifestyles
of the other characters Nick notes that
he is from a family of quote prominent
well-to-do people in this middle western
City for three generations so clearly
someone in Nick's family did accomplish
the American dream perhaps Fitzgerald's
more pure authentic version of it which
produced a reasonable individual like
Nick one could make the case that Nick
is a bad person he did after all Stand
By and witness the world burning and
lethal drama of his peers unfold but I
think it is more accurate to call Nick
shallow he is a shallow person who wants
shallow
relationships we can see this when he
writes I like to walk up Fifth Avenue
and pick out romantic women from the
crowd and imagine that in a few minutes
I was going to enter into their lives
and no one would ever know or disapprove
sometimes in my mind I followed them to
their apartments on the corners of
hidden streets and they turned and
smiled back at me before they faded
through a door into warm
Darkness even Nick's most romantic
intimate fantasies conclude in anonymity
Nick also declares that quote life is
best viewed through a single window he
has no interest in Grand perspectives
his view of the world is intentionally
limited Nick does not intervene or save
anyone simply because he is not
interested perhaps that makes him a bad
person or perhaps not that is for the
reader to decide but Nick speaks to his
inaction in the book he has a very
cynical opinion on the prospect of
saving these people from anything Nick
states that the entire group was
distorted Beyond his eyes power of
Correction to Nick the American dream is
sour he views the things which
characterize it as corrupt and bizarre
so he functions as something of a proxy
for Fitzgerald himself embodying a sense
of disillusionment Nick ultimately
washes his hands of the entire Gatsby
Affair concluding that all is in fact
lost we can perhaps see this in the
following passage I was reminded of
something an elusive Rhythm a fragment
of lost words that I heard somewhere a
long time ago for a moment a phrase
tried to take shape in my mouth and my
lips parted like a dumb man's as though
there was more struggling upon them than
a wisp of startled air but they made no
sound and what I had almost remembered
was
incommunicado forever
there is to one minor character who is
emblematic of Fitzgerald's American
dream that is eing clip Springer who is
a piano player and something of a
squatter at Gatsby's residence indeed he
gets the nickname The Border although
clip Springer has relatively little
space in the book his existence is a
pointed warning of American materialism
clip Springer often plays piano at
Gatsby's party serving as an Entertainer
but he lingers around the home
throughout the week and even still
Gatsby seems to have only disinterested
ambivalence for the man clip Springer is
almost a caricature of the American
materialist he wanders around Gatsby's
home unkempt taking advantage of his
host's Blas generosity clip Springer is
a wholly disrespectful and disinterested
man who enjoys only the rampant
debauchery and material possessions
which Gatsby provides he attends
Gatsby's funeral not out of respect but
instead to request a pair of shoes sent
to his house for Fitzgerald this is the
impact that the American dream and
surrounding culture has on the
individual it transmutes people into
leeches who care not for one another but
instead suck away at their peers for the
material luxuries of life in
Fitzgerald's eyes the American
Experience can be separated into two
distinct Parts there exist the material
physical functional realities of our
American life on the other hand there
are the more profound and Universal the
spiritual wants and needs of the human
within Fitzgerald's American dream it is
incredibly difficult to see where one of
these ends and the other begins does the
American dream in so far as it is
represented by the gatses and buchanans
fulfill our spiritual needs does it take
the place of them perhaps Gatsby
represents the spiritual the idea that
things can always infinitely become
better this is a sort of Blind Faith
which requires some degree of youthful
optimism but can produce incredible
results meanwhile the buchanans are the
material realities the idea that
becoming better has suddenly become
synonymous with accumulating money as
well as the functional hierarchies that
have simultaneously made this both true
and
absurd unfortunately Gatsby is never
able to see through his illusion it is
gats before whom the lines have become
impossibly blurred he is unable to
discern that he is great in a way which
the buchanans will never be and so he
becomes terrible in the way the
buchanans are the realities of American
society meant Gatsby could never fulfill
his dream he is the spiritual which is
confused with the
material The Great Gatsby takes place in
a fictional version of Long Island New
York in the book this residential area
is divided into West W egg and East egg
West Egg is considered the new money
side it is where cadsby lives the houses
in West Egg are often aspirationally
modeled after famous mansions in Europe
the East egg is a more desirable
fashionable part of town that is
inhabited mostly by old money types and
of course it is where the buchanans live
it is plainly obvious to see how these
two places fit into Fitzgerald's vision
of the American dream these two
neighborhoods seem to represent the
division between the American dream and
its more real counterpart there are the
dreamers and there are those who already
sit at the top and these two groups are
linked by their love of material Goods
this allegory is made even more clear
when we investigate what lies between
East and West
Egg the Valley of the ashes is a bleak
industrial Wasteland between the two
eggs unlike the egg neighborhoods the
valley is inhabited by the very poor the
valley is also occupied by factories and
smoke stacks which put a gray dusty
bleakness over the area and its
residents while the eggs are described
in high shimmering language Fitzgerald
paints a much Bleaker picture of The
Valley Of Ashes he uses phrases like Ash
Gray paintless days spasms of Bleak dust
and calls it a solemn Dumping Ground
even the name itself is invokes feelings
of death within the book The Valley of
the ashes is the only setting which is
described as anything besides
aesthetically magnificent for Fitzgerald
the American dream in so far as it
existed was built on the backs of the
poor the Valley of the ashes represents
this idea wholly it is a place in which
production happens on a very real level
it is full of factories the novel's two
poorest characters Myrtle and her
husband also live in the Valley of the
ashes
the valley is where the opulence of the
buchanans and the gatses is truly
produced but it is also the place which
suffers the most visibly from this
production so here we have a vaguely
apocalyptic worldview from Fitzgerald
the Valley of the ashes is sort of the
dirty secret the hidden ingredient of
our American dream it is perhaps too the
result produced by a society of
materialism while the valley features
the story's most dismal atmosphere it is
also the place where the the book's most
tragic events occur it is where Tom is
unfaithful to Daisy it is too where Tom
physically abuses his mistress Myrtle
Daisy kills Myrtle In The Valley Of
Ashes this event also sets into motion
the death of Gatsby himself Tom and
Daisy ruthlessly abuse and exploit the
people in The Valley Of Ashes so too we
have the American dream in its
materialism sucking the life from the
lower classes in the Valley of the ashes
there is an old weathered billboard for
an optometrist named Dr TJ eckleberg the
billboard features a large pair of blue
eyes rimmed by Golden spectacles this
advertisement is often a well-deserved
centerpiece in analysis of the great
gadsby it is generally accepted that
these eyes represent God himself this
idea comes from two places first Scott
Fitzgerald was a religious man despite
his often indulgent lifestyle secondly
one of the book's characters explicitly
States this meaning when Mr Wilson
confronts Myrtle about her Affair he
takes her to their window and they gaze
at the billboard Mr Wilson declares God
knows what you've been doing everything
you've been doing you may fool me but
you can't fool
God the book's most tragic events occur
under the watchful eyes of Dr eckleberg
in this way we can perceive Fitzgerald
appealing to the highest order even if
we the people fail ourselves in our
country we cannot go without punishment
God is always
watching The Great Gatsby is one of the
finest American Works ever produced but
by many people's opinions it is the only
time F Scott Fitzgerald soared to such
enormous Heights so to earnestly
understand the work we should understand
Fitzgerald himself F Scott Fitzgerald
spent most of his life writing about the
rich but in his childhood he was
decidedly middle class his father was a
twice failed businessman and only
through an inheritance on Fitzgerald's
mother's side was the family able to
live in middle class Comfort an aunt of
Scott Fitzgerald paid for him to attend
a private school where his results were
mediocre the author eventually did
attend Princeton but only to drop out
and join the military during World War I
without getting too far into the
particulars of Fitzgerald's youth we can
say say he was distinctly not part of
the Gatsby or Buchanan world but some
part of him likely yearned for just that
in 1918 the pennil Fitzgerald wrote to
his friend I know I'll wake up some
morning and find the debutants have made
me famous overnight this happened
precisely when he published the book
this side of Paradise in 1920 the book
was a smash success and suddenly
Fitzgerald's status changed markedly he
later wrote that the offices of New York
were suddenly open to him quote I who
knew less of New York than any reporter
of 6 months standing was pushed into the
position of spokesman for the time and
indeed Fitzgerald basked in this new
lifestyle he was a full-on literary
celebrity gallivanting around New York
bars and high society he later wrote
that he once wept because quote I had
everything I wanted and knew I would
never be so happy again this is all to
say the issues of class mobility and
even the American dream were once
Fitzgerald knew intimately well he did
seem to grow disillusioned with the
glitz and Glam however Fitzgerald called
that period of America the greatest
gaudiest spending period in history he
would later write that even the snow
wasn't real that if you didn't want it
to snow you could just pay some money
but this lifestyle eventually caught up
with
Fitzgerald in the early 20s F Scott was
about $55,000 in debt around $39,000 in
today's money he began working 12 hours
per day writing 11 short stories and 5
months to climb out of debt by
Fitzgerald's words this sum allowed him
to rise from abject poverty back into
the middle class this work was far from
fulfilling though he wrote to a friend
that the writing was all trash and it
nearly broke my heart so by the time
Fitzgerald wrote The Great Gatsby he had
ascended to the Pinnacle of society
craft and then begun to pick himself up
again with the Great Gatsby though
Fitzgerald abandoned lofty ideas about
romantic High Society instead he
returned to what he knew the titular
character James gats was an impoverished
midwesterner Gatsby's ability to move
through the classes was partially based
on Fitzgerald himself with the author
noting he started out as one man I knew
and then changed into myself the
character of Daisy a Southern bell was
largely inspired by it's Gerald's lover
Zelda who like Daisy was an aloof
wealthy Alabama born woman who changed
romantic decisions at the drop of a hat
Nick caraway's past mirrors much of
Fitzgerald's Tom Buchanan is even imbued
with some of the author in his schooling
days just like Tom Fitzgerald was a
prodigiously talented athlete all of
Fitzgerald's experiences in American
society equipped him with a sharp harsh
perspective on our country country's
culture Fitzgerald's thesis with the
Great Gatsby was something like this the
culture of American materialism has
corrupted American ideals and will
continue to fracture the country indeed
he was proven correct almost
immediately in 1928 President Hoover
proclaimed we in America today are
nearer to the financial triumph over
poverty than ever before in the history
of our land the poor man is Vanishing
from us under the Republican system our
industrial output has increased as never
before and our wages have grown steadily
in buying
power in a way Hoover was right the poor
were Vanishing they were Vanishing from
their jobs because of an increasingly
unstable farming industry they were
Vanishing from unions due to a concerted
effort to minimize the power of the
worker African-American sharecroppers
were Vanishing from the south due to
mass layoffs forced to take low-paying
jobs in segregated neighborhoods and
live in squalor Mexican Americans were
Vanishing too they lived in extreme
poverty with an infant mortality rate
five times higher than their white
counterparts despite Hoover's
declarations income inequality was on
the rise like never before by 1929 the
top 1% of the population owned 19 % of
all personal wealth the top 5% owned 34%
certainly today these numbers seem tame
by comparison but in 1929 a family of
four required $2,000 per year for basic
necessities 50% of American families in
that same year did not reach this
minimum threshold then in 1929 the stock
market crashed Farms factories and mines
collapsed decimating the lower classes
first the automobile industry cratered
this all rippled through the Upper Crust
wiping out Investments and savings
foreign trade stumbled by 66% and within
3 years personal income in America had
dropped off by 50% the American dream
Fitzgerald's or otherwise was by all
counts dead in 1931 Fitzgerald wrote an
essay called Echoes of the Jazz Age in
which he practically eulogizes for the
highflying dreamers of the 20s it ended
2 years ago because the utter confidence
which was its essential prop received an
enormous jolt and it didn't take long
for the flimsy structure to settle
earthward and after 2 years the Jazz Age
seems as far away as the days before the
war it was borrowed time anyhow the
whole upper tenth of a Nation living
with the indifference of grand dukes and
the casualness of chorus girls but the
moralizing is easy now and it was
pleasant to be in one's 20s in such a
certain and unworried time the American
dream would be reborn in the ashes of
World War II however the American
economy grew by 37% in the 1950s and the
American Family saw a 30% surge in
spending power surely it is no
coincidence that it was the ' 50s when
the Great Gatsby was finally lauded as a
masterpiece of American
literature in the years since the
American dream has died and been reborn
over and over again I tend to think this
essay need not leap into every
Incarnation and failure instead for our
conclusion we can simply look to the man
who invented the American dream
itself Fitzgerald saw the potential for
the American dream to Decay but he was
not the first one to Envision this
possibility in fact this dream was
brought into phrase alongside exactly
this type of warning James truso Adams
coined the term the American dream in
his 1931 book The Epic of America
America he notes pointedly the
materialistic Perils of our American
Dream saying the American dream that has
lured tens of millions of all Nations to
our Shores in the past Century has not
been a dream of merely material plenty
though that has doubtless counted
heavily it has been much more than that
it has been a dream of being able to
grow to fullest development as man and
woman unhampered by the barriers which
had slowly been erected in older
civilizations unrepressed by so social
orders which had developed for the
benefit of classes rather than for the
simple human being of any and every
class and that dream has been realized
more fully in actual life here than
anywhere else though very imperfectly
even among
ourselves our American Dream should not
be predicated on larger houses or faster
cars we should not be gatsi and we
should not aspire to be the buchanans we
must create a fuller dream than these
shimmering objects we must seek one
which elevates and works for all Not
Alone the privileged our American Dream
must not be a guarded Tower in the East
egg but a place which grants entry to
those citizens of the world who seek
Earnest
fulfillment mechanically this requires
more than the free hand of our markets
it requires caution thought and indeed
action as Adams noted if the American
dream is to come true and to abide with
us it will at bottom depend on the
people themselves if we are to achieve a
richer and Fuller life for all they have
got to know what such an achievement
implies in a modern industrial State an
economic base is essential for all we
point to Pride to our national income
but the nation is only an aggregate of
individual men and women when we turn
from the single figure of total income
to the incomes of individuals we find a
very Market Injustice in its
distribution it has been said that those
qualities you dislike in others are the
ones you see in yourself as we look at
Fitzgerald's book and its actors The
Great Gatsby proves this can also be
true for an entire nation The Great
Gatsby eviscerated the very soul of
America and one century later it
continues to do so